doc: add vhost-user-blk documentation (#4210)
firecracker-microvm/firecracker: docs/api_requests/block-vhost-user.md

# Vhost-user block device

> As an alternative to [block device](block-io-engine.md) `Sync` and `Async`

Reviewer: nit:

```suggestion
As an alternative to file-backed [block device](block-io-engine.md) engine,
```

`Sync` and `Async` seem irrelevant here.

Author: well, they are somewhat relevant because the page I'm referring to is named after engines. Updated.

engines, Firecracker supports a vhost-user block device.

There is a good introduction of how a vhost-user block device works
in general at [FOSDEM23](https://archive.fosdem.org/2023/schedule/event/sds_vhost_user_blk).

[Vhost-user](https://qemu-project.gitlab.io/qemu/interop/vhost-user.html)
is a userspace protocol that allows to delegate Virtio queue processing
to another userspace process on the host, as opposed to performing this task
within Firecracker's VMM thread.

In the vhost-user architecture, the VMM acts as a vhost-user frontend, and
it is responsible for connecting to the backend via a Unix domain socket (UDS)

> and sharing sufficient information about the guest memory and Virtio queues.

Reviewer: It is also responsible for setting up the device, interacting with guest, feature negotiation and all, right?

Author: updated

> The vhost-user backend is supposed to receive all this information and perform

Reviewer: ```suggest
The vhost-user backend receives all this information and performs
```

Author: updated

> handling of guests's requests. The UDS socket is only used for control purposes

Reviewer: nit: `control purposes` -> `control plane purposes`.

Author: done

> the setup is done.

Reviewer 2: I think it is worth mentioning that it is not used in our implementation. Technically it can communicate back the config change (or maybe smth else as well).

Author: fair, updated

Firecracker only implements a vhost-user frontend. Users are free
to choose from [existing open source backends](#backends) or implement their
own.

## Topology

Each vhost-user device connects to its own UDS socket. There is no way for
multiple devices to share a single socket, as there is no way to differentiate

> messages related to devices.

Reviewer: that is a design choice of the vhost-user protocol, right? If that is so, we could mention that explicitly.

Author: no, this is a property of the vhost-user protocol, as far as I know

Reviewer: that's what I meant. Maybe we should clarify that. But not extremely important.

Author: done

Each device can be served by a separate backend or a single backend can serve
multiple devices.

## Interactions with the backend

There are two points when the vhost-user frontend communicates with
the backend:

1. Device initialisation. When a vhost-user device is created, Firecracker
   connects to the corresponding UDS socket and negotiates Virtio and Vhost
   features with backend and retrieves device configuration.
1. Device activation. When the guest driver finishes setting up the device,
   Firecracker shares memory tables and Virtio queue information with the backend.
   As a part of this, Firecracker shares file descriptors for guest's memory

>    regions, as well as file descriptors for queue notifications.

Reviewer: Just a thought (not necessarily actionable in this PR). A lot of this info is `vhost-user` generic, rather than `vhost-user-block` specific. Do you see value in having a separate doc for `vhost-user` generic info?

Reviewer: Thoughts about this? If you don't think we should do this here feel free to resolve.

Reviewer: Works for me! I was mainly asking your view if that makes sense?

## Advantages

While vhost-user block is considered an optimisation to Firecracker IO, a naive

> implementation of the backend is not going to improve performance.

Reviewer: This reads like a disadvantage. I am not sure we need to mention that at all. Certainly, not here.

Reviewer: Any thoughts on this?

the performance improvement will be coming from the fact that the custom logic
is implemented in the same process that handles Virtio queues, which reduces
the number of required context switches.

## Backends

There are a number of open source implementations of a vhost-user backend
available for reference:

1. [Qemu backend](https://github.com/qemu/qemu/tree/master/contrib/vhost-user-blk)
1. [Cloud Hypervisor backend](https://github.com/cloud-hypervisor/cloud-hypervisor/tree/main/vhost_user_block)
1. [crosvm backend](https://github.com/google/crosvm/blob/main/devices/src/virtio/vhost/user/device/block.rs)
1. [SPDK backend](https://github.com/spdk/spdk/blob/master/lib/vhost/vhost_blk.c)

## Security considerations

### Guest memory sharing

By design, a vhost-user frontend must share file descriptors
of all guest memory regions to the backend. In order to achive that,
guest memory is created as a [memfd](https://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man2/memfd_create.2.html)
and mapped as `MAP_SHARED`.

#### File descriptor in procfs

An open `memfd` is reflected in `procfs` as any other open file descriptor:

```shell
$ ls -l /proc/{pid}/fd | grep memfd

> lrwx------ 1 1234 1234 64 Nov  2 13:39 32 -> /memfd:guest_mem (deleted)

Reviewer: Is the `(deleted)` part correct here?

Reviewer: If this is correct, feel free to resolve the comment.

Author: yes, this is correct. I don't know for sure what it means, but I think it may be related to the fact the file is not visible at filesystem level.

```

Any process on the host that has access to this file in `procfs` will be able
to map the file descriptor and observe runtime behaviour of the guest.

At the moment, Firecracker does not close the `memfd`, because it must remain open
until all the configured vhost-user devices have been activated and their info
shared with the backends. This kind of tracking is not implemented in Firecracker,
but may be implemented in the future. Meanwhile, users need to make sure that
the access to the Firecracker's `procfs` tree is restricted to trusted processes
on the host.

On the backend side, it is advised that the backend closes
the guest memory region file descriptors after mapping them into the address

> space.

Reviewer: What effect does that have in the `memfd` file appearing in procfs? Also:

`mapping them into the address space.` -> `mapping them into its own address space`.

Reviewer: comments on this?

Author: >What effect does that have in the memfd file appearing in procfs?

Does the following not answer your question?

>Any process on the host that has access to this file in `procfs` will be able
to map the file descriptor and observe runtime behaviour of the guest.

>mapping them into the address space. -> mapping them into its own address space.

I don't think it is essential, because it doesn't look possible to map something to another process's address space, does it?

Author: >mapping them into the address space. -> mapping them into its own address space.

added, since I was at it anyway

Reviewer: > Does the following not answer your question?

    Any process on the host that has access to this file in procfs will be able
    to map the file descriptor and observe runtime behaviour of the guest.

It does! Sorry, I missed that.

#### Resource limit in jailer

The Firecracker [jailer](../jailer.md) allows to configure resource limits
for the Firecracker process. Specifically, it allows to set the maximum file
size. Since `memfd` that is used to back the guest memory is considered a file,
the file size resource limit cannot be less than the biggest guest memory
region. This does not require any special action from a user, but needs to be
taken into consideration.

### Remote code execution in the backend

It is recommended to run Firecracker using the [jailer](../jailer.md). Since
the vhost-user backend interacts with the guest via a Virtio queue, there is

> a potential for the guest to exercise issues in the backend code base

Reviewer: nit: I _think_ `code base` -> `codebase`

to trigger undesired behaviours. Users should consider running their backend

> in a jailer or applying other adequate security measures to restrict it.

Reviewer: maybe we should clarify that our jailer is not designed to jail arbitrary binaries, so users should use their own solutions (?)

Author: done

It is also recommended to use proactive security measures like running
a Virtio-level fuzzer in the guest during testing to make sure that the backend
correctly handles all possible classes of inputs (including invalid ones)
from the guest.

### Rate limiting / cgroups

Virtio block device in Firecracker has a [rate limiting capability](../design.md#io-storage-networking-and-rate-limiting).

In the vhost-user case, Firecracker does not participate in handling requests
from the guest, so rate limiting becomes backend's responsibility.

As an additional indirect measure, users can make use of `cgroups` settings

> (either via Firecracker jailer or independently) in order to restrict host CPU

Reviewer: I thought that Firecracker jailer cannot be used to run arbitrary binaries (see previous comment as well). Am I wrong?

Author: this is talking about running the guest in the jailer to restrict its CPU time to indirectly influence the amount of IO

Reviewer: oh right, I see now! thanks for the clarification

consumption of the guest, which would transitively limit guest's IO activity.

### Protection against defects in the backend code

Due to potential defects in the backend (eg mislocating Virtio queues or writes
to a wrong location in the guest memory), the guest execution may be affected.
It is advised that customers monitor guest's health periodically.

Additionally, in order to avoid orhpaned Firecracker processes if the backend

> crashes, the backend may need to send a `SIGBUS` signal to the Firecracker

Reviewer: For my own information: Is `SIGBUS` a standard signal to send in these cases?

Reviewer: In that case, maybe we could rephrase this to something like:

`... if the backend crashes, it may need to send a signal, such as SIGBUS to Firecracker`

Author: done, thanks

In the vhost-user architecture, the VMM acts as a vhost-user frontend and
it is responsible for:

- connecting to the backend via a Unix domain socket (UDS)
- feature negotiation with the backend and the guest
- handling device configuration requests from the guest
- sharing sufficient information about the guest memory and Virtio queues
  with the backend

The vhost-user backend receives the information from the frontend and performs
handling of IO requests from the guest.

The UDS socket is only used for control plane purposes
and does not participate in the data plane.

Firecracker only implements a vhost-user frontend. Users are free
to choose from [existing open source backends](#backends) or implement their
own.

## Topology

Each vhost-user device connects to its own UDS socket. There is no way for
multiple devices to share a single socket, as there is no way to differentiate
messages related to devices at the vhost-user protocol level.

Each device can be served by a separate backend or a single backend can serve
multiple devices.

## Interactions with the backend

There are two points when the vhost-user frontend communicates with
the backend:

> 

Reviewer 2: I saw you mention PATCH in the `patch-block.md`. In this case there are 3 places where FC communicates with backend.

Author: That is a good point. Updated.

own.

## Topology

Each vhost-user device connects to its own UDS socket. There is no way for
multiple devices to share a single socket, as there is no way to differentiate
messages related to devices at the vhost-user protocol level.

Each device can be served by a separate backend or a single backend can serve
multiple devices.

## Interactions with the backend

There are three points when the vhost-user frontend communicates with
the backend:

1. Device initialisation. When a vhost-user device is created, Firecracker
   connects to the corresponding UDS socket and negotiates Virtio and Vhost
   features with backend and retrieves device configuration.
1. Device activation. When the guest driver finishes setting up the device,
   Firecracker shares memory tables and Virtio queue information with the backend.
   As a part of this, Firecracker shares file descriptors for guest's memory
   regions, as well as file descriptors for queue notifications.
1. Config update. When receving a [`PATCH` request](./patch-block.md#updating-vhost-user-block-devices-after-boot)
   on a vhost-user backed drive, Firecracker rerequests the device config

>    from the backend in order to make the new config available to the guest.

Reviewer 2: I assume this should be 1. 2. 3. not 1. 1. 1.

Author: no, markdown allows to do that and renders as 1, 2, 3. It's convenient in a way we don't need to update all numbers if we add something at the beginning.

Reviewer 2: oh ok, didn't know.

## Advantages

While vhost-user block is considered an optimisation to Firecracker IO, a naive
implementation of the backend is not going to improve performance.

> The major advantage of using a vhost-user device is the backend can implement

Author: I believe both are dramatically correct, but added if that makes it more readable for someone.

> The major advantage of using a vhost-user device is the backend can implement

Reviewer 3: thanks

custom processing logic. It can use intelligent algorithms to serve block

> requests, eg by fetching the block device data over the network or using

Author: done

encryption or using sophisticated readahead logic. In such cases,
the performance improvement will be coming from the fact that the custom logic
is implemented in the same process that handles Virtio queues, which reduces
the number of required context switches.

## Backends

There are a number of open source implementations of a vhost-user backend
available for reference:

1. [Qemu backend](https://github.com/qemu/qemu/tree/master/contrib/vhost-user-blk)
1. [Cloud Hypervisor backend](https://github.com/cloud-hypervisor/cloud-hypervisor/tree/main/vhost_user_block)
1. [crosvm backend](https://github.com/google/crosvm/blob/main/devices/src/virtio/vhost/user/device/block.rs)
1. [SPDK backend](https://github.com/spdk/spdk/blob/master/lib/vhost/vhost_blk.c)

> 

Author: added

> 

Reviewer 3: thanks
